>> Hello, hello.
Hey, Jesse.
>> Hey, Michael.
>> Great to have you here on the show.
Welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
>> Thanks a lot.
>> Yeah, it has been a little while since you were on the show.
You were the second guest ever.
How about that?
How cool is that?
>> That's really cool.
I knew it was a while ago.
I think it was 2015.
And we were talking about Python and MongoDB, which is a natural
is a natural subject, but I didn't know it was so early in your career.
Yeah, it was-- you really helped launch the podcast, so thanks for that.
And then you also did a really popular episode
about writing an excellent programming blog.
And we talked about fun things like design patterns
of writing for technical writing.
That was really well received.
So yeah, excellent to have you back.
we're going to make it a little bit more modern than just five,
six years ago, whatever that was.
Yeah.
Cool.
So what have you been up to?
Give us maybe a quick intro for people who don't know you
and catch up on what you've been up to since then.
Yeah, so you and I met because when I joined MongoDB
around 2011, I was the Python evangelist, which is still
my favorite job title of all time.
And still at MongoDB, and I've been doing various sorts of engineering the whole time,
I switched over to doing C and C++ and moved from doing Python client library work,
I had been working on PyMongo, to working on the core MongoDB server,
and helped develop the first version of serverless MongoDB,
which is pay-as-you-go.
And now I'm a researcher with MongoDB Labs,
which is our tiny little research organization.
And I'm looking at new products, cutting-edge techniques
that we might want to adopt at MongoDB.
All of those things sound super awesome.
Maybe take them in order if I remember the right.
So you worked on PyMongo, which is,
if people use MongoDB at all,
they basically either use PyMongo or Motor, right?
- Right.
- And did you also work on Motor?
You did, right?
- Yeah, I invented Motor and came up with the cute name.
At the time, Tornado was the,
the one of the major asynchronous Python servers.
- Very ahead of its time in that sense.
There's, you know, way before async and await
and asyncio and all those things.
- Yeah, that's right.
It was extremely influential.
And I wanted PyMongo to work well with Tornado.
So I came up with this very complicated way
to sort of asynchronize PyMongo
and make it work with Tornado.
And I combined Mongo with Tornado to come up with Motor.
And it's still maintained, but not by me.
And it's a good choice if you are,
if you want that asynchronous API,
it now supports async and await,
and it now works with asyncio as well as Tornado.
So if you have some reason for wanting
to do async Python already,
and then you want to connect to MongoDB
without fear of blocking your application,
then motor is the driver of choice.
- Yeah, absolutely.
And much like if you're using,
if you're doing synchronous MongoDB stuff in Python,
chances are using PyMongo.
If you're doing async stuff, you're probably using motor.
For example, the website you're looking at here
is backed by MongoDB, that is top Python.
And it uses Beanie,
which does basically Pydantic and Async and Await
plus MongoDB.
But the way you work with it is you create a motor connection,
motor client, and hand it off to the underlying framework.
So really, it's still using your code.
That's cool.
That's neat.
Yeah, pretty neat.
So I imagine those are two really different worlds,
building client libraries to talk to some semi black box type of system, like I send
requests over the API to Mongo and it does its thing and I get a response, to switching
and being inside that box, right?
What's the...
Maybe contrast those two worlds because I think they're probably pretty different.
Yeah, the problem spaces are practically disjoint.
When I was working on MongoDB drivers,
I had a great deal of concern for making the API usable by application developers.
A lot of my time was spent figuring out how to make a consistent experience
experience for people who are using MongoDB from Python and also from JavaScript or C or PHP.
These are completely different kinds of languages, but you need as much consistency as possible
while still respecting the style of the language itself. And then, of course,
since these are semantically versioned libraries, almost every decision you make is permanent.
On the server side, on the other hand, I was mainly concerned with how to implement algorithms
that solved tricky problems. And so we could change our minds every few years with sort
of upgrade downgrade logic. It's complicated, but it's not permanent in the way that an
API is. And a lot of the problems that it was handling on the server side, first of
I was working with C++ in a half million light code base.
So that was a great deal more complexity
than I'd ever confronted before.
>>And it's probably really super polished.
And every little change probably has many, many knock-on effects
that you've got to carefully think about.
And you're like, ah, do we really need to check for that?
Would this ever happen?
or can we reorder those bytes?
Probably it's fine.
- There's a lot of hidden complexity
that people who've been working on the server code
is longer than I kept pointing out to me.
Like, no, you can't just change this data structure.
You have to take the following six locks
before you can even think about touching that.
And then interactions among the servers
in a replica set or a sharded cluster are literally
exponentially complex.
>> Yeah, like n factorial type of thing.
>> Right.
>> OK.
And C++ versus Python, that's a pretty big distinction there.
>> Yeah, I had coded C++ right out of college.
I thought I was going to be a 3D graphics guy working
for Pixar, which never happened, but I had known C++ once upon a time. But C++ in the 90s is
a completely different language from modern C++, so I had a lot of catching up to do.
On the other hand, I really enjoyed the fact that you can make things run fast,
And I hope that this is not offensive.
But CPython has a very low ceiling for performance.
And you can make algorithms more efficient,
but you can't really make your code run all that fast.
And I found it really enjoyable to write C++
and have things finish in microseconds.
Right, right. Near, about as fast as it gets,
unless you're going to go do assembler.
Yep.
And then maybe not, maybe you still can't do the compiler.
Probably not. Certainly not for me.
Yeah, and who would want to write assembler, right?
Especially, oh my gosh.
No, I think the story with Python performance is interesting.
A lot of times it's plenty fast for what people need to do,
but if you're building a server, like a high-end database server,
you know, those microseconds count.
And that's a different world.
It's a different trade-off, trading somewhat developer
speed for performance and code speed.
Although I do think we're getting some proper attention
on Python speed in the last couple of years,
and will for the next couple as well,
with the faster CPython initiative and 3.10, 3.11,
3.12, all that stuff.
But it's still-- even the fast versions of those
or not C++ type of speed.
- Yeah, it's a fundamentally different way
of executing code and they're never really going to overlap.
- Yeah, yeah, maybe someday we'll get fully compiled Python.
Who knows what the future holds, but until then.
Long as it's interpreted, probably not.
All right, the third thing you mentioned
which sounds interesting as well is MongoDB Labs.
Can you give us an example of some of the things that have come out of there or some of the types
of problems you're researching, anything like that? How secret is the lab? Is it like a skunk's work
at Lockheed Martin? Can you talk a little about it? >> I can certainly talk about it. It's
small and fairly new, a couple of years old, about a dozen people, working on a number of things.
One of them is streaming data processing,
which I think we'll be able to announce quite a bit more
about that soon.
>>Is this like a high-speed time series data,
like I'm hooked up to some kind of pipe to the NASDAQ
or something like this?
Or what's an example?
Right, where you've got a source of data events, not necessarily stored in any database anywhere,
but coming in as a continuous stream of events. And you want to connect stream processors in some
sort of kind of network of pipes and nodes and eventually drop the results into MongoDB or
or another data store or send it off to another service,
MongoDB Labs has been a place where we can incubate
some of those ideas and make them available
in our developer data platform.
- Yeah, okay.
Sounds like a really cool place to work,
just sort of playing with ideas
and got the time and space to do that, right?
Yeah, Labs has also been a place where we incubate cryptography ideas,
like queryable encryption,
where MongoDB doesn't know the contents of your data,
but can nevertheless answer queries about it.
I personally have been working on improving the debugging experience
for people who are writing complex aggregation pipelines,
And then what I'm working on right now
is predictive scaling for Atlas.
The idea is that a lot of customers
have really regular weekly business cycles
or daily business cycles.
You might have Monday through Friday,
traffic gradually increases around nine or 10 a.m.
and then it drops off at the end of the day
and then you have a huge spike at midnight
when all of your nightly analytics queries go off
and then the weekend is quiet.
We should be able to detect those patterns
and automatically scale you up and down so
that you have the capacity you need just before you need it.
And then you don't pay for it at a time when you predictably
do not need it.
Actual deployment of that idea, I
have no idea how far off that is.
But that's what's nice about labs
is that we are working on things that the larger company
doesn't have scheduled yet.
- Yeah.
And you can experiment, right?
It's a lab.
- Exactly.
- Tell people about Atlas a little bit.
You talked about your predictive scaling in Atlas.
I imagine not everyone knows what that is.
- Sure.
Atlas is MongoDB's cloud services.
and we originally launched it as a database as a service.
So you decide how you want to deploy your database,
a replica set or a sharded cluster,
which cloud providers you want to use.
We allow you to use multiple cloud providers
and what size of server you need.
And so we would manage backups and administration
and that sort of thing, upgrades and so on.
More recently, we've announced Atlas Serverless,
which is pay as you go.
So you no longer have to worry about
how your database is deployed, what instance size,
you don't need to do capacity planning.
We just auto scale you and bill you for what you used.
We've also got a few other services,
which I'm not an expert in,
but we've got Atlas Data Federation,
which helps you move data among different services,
both MongoDB services and other ones.
And those are kind of the highlights as far as I'm aware.
- Yeah, sounds good.
All right, I'll put a link to the GitHub organization
for MongoDB Labs up there.
There's some cool looking repos
and also some funny names like Covert Snooty.
- We don't have to be professional over here, it's nice.
- Exactly, you can just have fun with it.
Yeah, excellent.
All right, well, let's talk a little bit about databases
in the broad sense, and then we can dive into
the core ideas that I invited you here,
which I guess is worth pointing out.
The reason I knew about this and reached out to you
was you gave a talk at PyCon 2023.
Maybe tell us a bit about that experience
before we jump into the databases.
- It's really nice to have PyCon back after COVID.
I went to PyCon at Salt Lake City last year and this year.
And last year I spoke about
modern concurrency patterns in Python.
And this year I talked about consistency and isolation.
And I also learned a lot.
After being a C++ programmer and going to PyCon and being not sure what I was doing
at PyCon anymore, this year I came as a researcher.
And so the areas of my interests are essentially everything.
And so I went to a bunch of talks and learned a bunch of stuff and renewed my love for being
at PyCon.
- Wow, that's excellent.
- I wanted to talk about consistency and isolation
at PyCon because these are fundamental database concepts.
They are some of the hardest to learn
that I've ever encountered in computer science.
And I kind of think that most of the approaches are bad.
You can read the fundamental papers,
and you probably should,
but reading the original papers
is a very hard way to learn something,
and they tend to be too concise and too abstract
and not very well digested.
And then maybe if I'd taken that databases
elective in college and read the textbook,
I would be in better shape, but I didn't.
And then I joined a database company
and I had to learn it on the job.
So I came up with a few ways of thinking about it,
which took me a few years.
So I wanted to come to PyCon and share those
and hopefully accelerate other people's learning.
- Yeah, I imagine approach,
everything about a conference like that is really different
if you come with a researcher's mindset.
You go hit all the expo booths and you're like,
"All right, I need your ideas.
"Tell me all about this," with a special focus, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, cool, all right.
Let's talk databases, and I think we could start it
with just, you know, not every database is the same.
I think long ago, people, when they said database,
they just meant relational database, right?
And nowadays, there's more variety.
And by nowadays, I'm thinking the last 15 years, right?
It's not just today.
But let's just maybe get a, just a quick
high level landscape view
of the different kinds of databases.
So relational, that's probably what most people are using.
Yeah, I'm gonna go just give us a rundown
of your thoughts on how this category
and just categorization goes.
- Yeah, really? - Talks out of me, I guess.
- Yeah, relational databases,
which are made of tables of rows and columns,
and you almost always query them with SQL,
which is standardized,
although every database has its own extensions,
came to really dominate in the '90s.
And they are great for a lot of reasons.
for a lot of reasons.
And I think everybody should know how to use them.
But, you know, around the time that I joined MongoDB in 2011,
something was happening, which is that
the scale of data
came to the point where you needed specialized approaches.
And then another thing that was going on was that,
sort of funny enough, object-oriented programming
programming and relational databases had both come to dominate at the same time,
and they work very, very poorly with each other. Yeah, that is funny, but that did happen.
Because relational, I mean, a relation is sort of the object opposite of an object. Object-oriented
programs are quite hierarchical and fairly flexible, and relations are not hierarchical
and extremely inflexible.
So we call that the impedance mismatch.
I don't know if that's actually a helpful term.
It's just-- it's bad.
>>Victor: Yeah, the object-relational impedance
mismatch, if people are familiar with that term.
I haven't thought of that for a while,
but yeah, that was a big concern often.
>>Galen: Right.
NoSQL was kind of a movement, and it encompassed a number of solutions to these problems.
One of them is that NoSQL databases tend to be distributed.
So, whereas, before I came to MongoDB, I was working with an Oracle database.
And as load increased, we just needed to buy a bigger and bigger single box
until we had like a million dollar refrigerator sized thing,
which must never ever go down.
And many of the NoSQL databases, including MongoDB, are distributed.
So you can use a large number of smaller machines, which is much more economical.
Much more cloud friendly.
It's not only a good way to scale your CPU and RAM,
but it's also a good way to ensure reliability
in geo distribution.
So we took advantage of all that.
We kind of built in the distributed nature of it
quite early.
And a lot of the other NoSQL databases did as well.
We're also a document database with the data format
is a lot like JSON, and it's easily convertible to JSON.
And that means that it's very familiar for people
who write Python or JavaScript or anything like that.
We store things that are a lot like dictionaries and lists.
And--
- They're API friendly, right?
Like you're exchanging JSON.
So you're 95% of the way there just on your API data exchange
- Yeah, if you want to expose a MongoDB collection
as something to a REST API,
you can do that in a couple of lines
because JSON and MongoDB data are so similar.
- Yep.
All right, so document databases
is probably the best known NoSQL,
but we also have key value stores
and column-oriented databases.
We're still trying to grok them.
- Yeah, key value stores,
are just like big dicks in the sky.
And in exchange for that simplicity,
they're usually extremely fast and extremely robust.
Memcached for example.
And column oriented databases,
I'm still wrapping my head around.
So I'm not gonna talk about that all that much,
but it's my impression that they're good
for giant analytics jobs
where you tend to need to do a huge aggregation,
like find the sum or the mean
of a very large amount of consistent data.
- Maybe Pandas is a good mental model
or NumPy or something like that,
where you say, I'm gonna apply this operation
to this whole column
and you don't want it on a per user basis.
You wanna say, I want all the latency times as a thing.
Right, that's a more natural thing to ask for
instead of projecting out the latency
where across all of them, that kind of thing.
Graph databases, I think are also,
seem to be going strong still.
- Yeah, and this is an area where MongoDB hasn't,
has kind of left it to our competitors for the moment.
But graph databases are great at representing nodes
that are connected by edges.
So for example, a social network of people with friendships
or a network of servers that are connected
by ethernet cables and you wanna do queries
like how closely connected is this to that?
- Maybe even modeling like hierarchies
within a large corporate organization or something.
This person reports to that person
and then those kinds of things.
- Yeah, okay, so I think that sets the stage
for a lot of what we're talking about.
You know, what ones in terms of consistency and isolation,
this applies to relational documents,
probably not key value stores.
I don't know about graph databases at all
in terms of these.
Which ones of these are kind of relevant
to the main topic here?
- Actually, it's interesting.
So first of all, let's separate out that isolation
is a way of--
so even on a single machine, a database
can run concurrent operations.
So you could have two transactions
that are going on at once, and their operations
may be in some way interleaved.
And if the database allows concurrency
like this on a single machine, then that can reveal phenomena
that you would not observe if concurrency were not allowed.
And these phenomena are called anomalies.
And these terms, phenomena and anomalies,
go all the way back to the '80s, maybe to the 1970s,
database theory.
And there's nothing specific to relational or non-relational
data to the SQL language or any other query language.
So long as the database allows concurrency,
then anomalies are possible.
And so the database may choose to provide isolation levels
to you.
There are four isolation levels that people have probably
heard of that are in the SQL standard.
And so obviously they've got that connection
to the relational model and the SQL language.
But in my PyCon talk, I was just showing a key value store.
- Yeah, that's right.
You actually were kind of more or less
writing the code for the different implementations
or demonstrating the code for the different implementations
of how you might do a key value store.
So what you did was you said, let's imagine we just
have a giant dictionary in memory,
and that was our database, at least for a table
or a collection, right?
And then how do we model these isolation levels in Python code,
right?
Yeah, right, exactly.
So there was no SQL involved.
The data was just a dict.
But it was showing how you could use Python locks to provide
each of the four well-known isolation levels
and allow concurrency.
>> All right, so I interrupted you a tiny bit there.
What are the four isolation levels?
At least the SQL standard ones.
>> Right, so there's read uncommitted,
which is anything goes.
>> YOLO.
Every operation that one transaction does
is immediately visible to all the others,
or may be visible to all the others,
even if the transaction hasn't committed yet,
even if it aborts later.
- Right.
- And so the concurrency is nakedly displayed
to all of the clients.
Basically, you don't see this in practice.
Read committed is what people are much more accustomed to,
where your transaction as it's going along
may see the data change as other transactions commit,
but then its own rights are only visible
to other transactions all in one instant
at the moment that your transaction commits.
But of course, you could read the same value
multiple times in a row and get different answers
because other transactions are allowed to commit
and modify it as you go.
- Right, I imagine that that's a pretty common level.
The read uncommitted is just chaos, right?
It's like multi-threading without locks, basically.
Without any locking mechanism or protection.
While that it would be the fastest,
it's probably too risky.
But read committed, how common do you think that is?
Read committed is quite prominent.
It's the default for a number of the SQL databases.
I don't remember which exactly.
But people can live with it pretty happily.
And to be honest, MongoDB's default is read uncommitted.
If you write to the primary, other clients
can see those rights immediately.
There's no transaction by default.
After all, you have to opt into transactions on MongoDB.
And--
- There are atomic changes you can make.
Like you can use the set and push to set
and those kinds of operators on a single document.
But as soon as you start talking to two documents
in the same collection or cross collection,
then this is what you're talking about.
There's no transaction, right?
- Yeah, that's exactly right.
And the document model does make it much more practical
to do things without transactions
because you can keep related data altogether
in a single document and update it in one statement.
- Yeah.
- Whereas the relational model tends to kind of
spray your data around and make it much more difficult
to maintain whatever application invariance you want
because you have to modify multiple rows at the same time.
- Yeah.
Yeah, multiple rows, multiple tables.
Like there could be a many to many relationship
that you're adding to or taking away from, right?
Just to update part of some statement, yeah.
- Right.
- Okay, so read uncommitted, read committed.
- The next one is serializable,
which takes a while to wrap your head around,
But with serializable isolation, there
is a total order of operations that every client sees
that is as if each transaction ran one at a time.
And each one read at one moment of time
and then committed at one moment of time.
with no other transactions operations interleaved.
So it's hard to explain.
It's also extremely intuitive.
It's almost what you would assume.
It's kind of like assume that there was no concurrency.
This is what it would look like.
The pedantic detail here is that the order
that the transactions appear to occur
might not be exactly the order that you did them in
for complicated implementation reasons.
So if you have multiple different databases
talking to each other,
it might not be good enough for you
because they might end up choosing
different orders of operations.
And so you can see anomalies there,
but basically serializable is the highest isolation level
that you're likely to need in a relational database.
I feel like that might be the default
for some of the relational databases.
Not 100% sure.
- I'm not 100% sure either.
There's also a compromise less than serializable
called repeatable read,
which means that any single piece of data that you've read,
you'll continue to see the same value for it
for the duration of your transaction until you commit.
And the way it's usually actually implemented
is a slightly stronger level called snapshot isolation,
where you just get a copy of the data
at the point in time when you first
started your transaction approximately.
And you just read as if you are always reading
from that version of the data until you commit.
So snapshot isolation is what people usually actually mean
by repeatable read and a lot of databases provided.
And it's the default for MongoDB.
When you start a transaction in MongoDB,
you read from a version of the data
for the rest of that transaction.
- Okay, interesting.
Yeah, you did say that MongoDB
typically doesn't have transactions
as its kind of recommended default way.
You know, look at a lot of the tutorials and stuff,
people are just making updates and so on.
But this didn't come out originally with MongoDB,
but at some point, what version did you all add transactions?
Like actual transactions?
- I wish I could remember.
- Yeah, I don't remember either,
but it was something like, oh, there we go, how about that?
Something around four, I think version four-ish.
That's it.
We're on version six now, but that was quite a while ago.
- Yeah.
But you've got to pick.
you've got to pick to go do those transactions
in Mongo, for example.
Whereas that's also true, say, for Postgres
or Microsoft SQL Server, right?
You've got to actually do the transactional stuff
in whatever code you're using to talk to that as well.
It's just more visible in a lot of the tutorials
and examples for those libraries, I think.
- Yeah, MongoDB in general has taken
a more kind of show our guts to you approach
where we early on the distributed nature of MongoDB,
which was much more visible to our users
than other databases and transactions now,
we kind of show you the details
a bit more than other databases do,
but that actually allows you to write more reliable code.
The interesting thing about an SQL interface
is that you can start a transaction,
do a bunch of writes, and then send the commit message.
And if you get some sort of error, like a network error,
perhaps you got disconnected or the server crashed,
you don't know.
But you don't know whether your transaction committed or not.
And if you reconnect, you don't know
whether you will see the data that you committed or not.
This is somewhat difficult to handle,
and most people aren't aware of it.
The MongoDB transaction API makes you think about this.
The drivers essentially have you pass a function
in which executes the transaction code,
and that it's automatically retried if the commit fails.
And so we give you the mechanism
to ensure reliable transaction commits.
- I see.
But it's more, yeah, sure.
You can either be sure it happened
or you have the mechanism to run it again in the API.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, okay.
Interesting.
So I guess one of the questions is,
well, let's look at two aspects here.
One of the things is you spoke about anomalies
and what might go wrong.
The read uncommitted, I think people can probably
conceptualize that pretty well, right?
It's just as multi-step transactions are happening,
other ones are potentially running
and you could read something either that transaction
could roll back after you've carried on
or you could have just had something
of the equivalent of a race condition, right?
So there's a term for that kind of anomaly.
Each of these anomalies have terms, I've learned.
Yeah.
And you can definitely memorize them.
And if you go to jepson.io, there's
a lovely diagram of the relationship
among all of the consistency and isolation levels.
>> G-Y-P-S-U-M?
>> That is J-E-P-S-E-N.io.
>> Ah.
>> Yeah.
This is a researcher named Kyle Kingsbury,
his website about consistency and isolation and testing.
This is really-- this is the best place, I think,
to go learn about this stuff.
>>Here we go, yeah.
OK.
Yeah, there's a lot of cool visualization stuff here.
>>Yeah, for those watching on the live stream,
we've got a tree diagram up that shows
all of the isolation levels, all of the consistency levels
that are commonly used, and how they relate to each other
terms of how, let's say, the serializable isolation is strictly stronger than read committed.
Every anomaly that is prohibited by serializable is also prohibited by read committed.
Got it. Okay. Interesting. Yeah, so maybe help us understand the read committed anomalies versus
like the read uncommitted one is like it's full of them. But maybe help us understand some of
the things that can go wrong or in the safer ones, like trying to decide between read committed and
serializable, for example. Right. This was also my approach when I first started learning.
[laughter]
>> BD: was to try to memorize these things.
And the reason why I'm not answering your question is that I don't think that this is
the right approach.
>> CB: Okay, what would you suggest?
>> BD: Yeah.
I think the right approach is to step back and ask, "Why do anomalies exist?"
And the answer is, I've come to understand it, is that databases want to permit more
concurrency so that you can get higher throughput with multiple transactions at once.
But you've got to sacrifice something for that.
What you've got to sacrifice is isolation.
Some of these anomalies have to appear.
And so why is that?
Why do you have to make that trade-off?
The short answer is that databases prevent anomalies by in some way locking pieces of data to prevent one transaction from modifying or even reading it if another transaction has modified or read it.
And so the more things you lock, the less concurrency is permitted.
And if you want to understand that in detail for each of the isolation levels and each
of the anomalies, you could watch the video of my PyCon talk, which goes through like
20 or 30 line long Python implementations of databases that provide each of these isolation
levels.
why they need different amounts of locking. You can see why they permit
different levels of concurrency. You can start to get a feel for what amount of
concurrency each of them permits, and also what sort of anomalies each of them
permits. And with that in mind, for me at least, thinking about how these things
are actually implemented gave me a much made it much easier for me to then memorize.
Okay read committed provides phantom reads. Why is that? What does that mean?
Now I understand that because I understand how the how on implementation might work.
Yeah I think that makes a lot of sense. That really is the relationship that people should
understand, right, that there's an inverse relationship between
sort of the data consistency and the lack of these anomalies, and
how much you can handle scale and concurrency, right? The
stricter, the more consistent the data is, the less scale that
you get. Right. And so where, where do you live? Can you get
to points where the database actually like locks up and kind
of a deadlock situation?
>> Yes.
And I show one of those in my PyCon talk.
The serializable level of isolation
is particularly prone to this.
Basically, if-- and I do this all with Star Trek memes.
So I show an example where Sulu reads one piece of data
and something which--
they're fighting over who gets to check out the shuttle
to go to surface for a shore leave.
And Sulu checks if Uhura has the shuttle, and he sees no.
But then Uhura starts a transaction
and checks if Sulu has the shuttle.
The answer is also no.
So each of them tries to then check out the shuttle.
But since they have each locked the row
that the other needs to modify, they then deadlock.
This then gets into fancy old database theory
of deadlock detection and resolution,
which is the subject of many textbooks.
But essentially, you're probably going to block
for some period of time,
and then a deadlock detector will come along
and abort one of the transactions
to allow the other to continue.
- Right, making your code more complex,
harder to work with, right?
And now your code needs to be able to handle this situation.
If you are awarded due to deadlock,
should you retry that transaction or not?
That's now something that the developer
needs to make a decision about.
>> Yeah.
OK.
So all of this that we've discussed so far
has to do with one or more database servers that just--
the requirement is that it allows concurrent queries
and updates and all that.
On the other side, we might have some kind
of distributed topology with in MongoDB case,
we have both replication and sharding,
which maybe worth touching on those things.
But in a lot of scale out situations,
you have some sort of data spread around
some kind of distributed database,
or even you'll see like geo-replicated data
I want to have my data replicated in Asia and the US
so that we can run our server-side code near data
for those different users, right?
- Right. - And that's the consistency,
not the isolation side of your talk, right?
- That's right. So to review,
isolation is a response to anomalies caused by concurrency
concurrency on one machine, and then consistency is a response to anomalies that are due to
replication in a distributed database.
So the distributed database, you always write to one of the nodes or you read from one of
the nodes for any particular operation.
And there are different rules about, is there only one leader that can take writes or can
any node take writes?
Is there, can you only read from the leader?
Can you read from any node?
Can you only read from some of the nodes?
But no matter what database you're using, you always read or write to some nodes and
then they replicate writes to other nodes.
And so there's always a lag because that replication
takes time.
So the most obvious example is if you write to the leader
and then immediately read from the follower,
the data that you just wrote may or may not be there yet.
So that's the source of inconsistencies.
And those inconsistencies are called anomalies as well.
And then there are multiple isolation levels,
sorry, consistency levels,
which allow or prevent various of those.
This is not standardized by the way.
So here you're going to see different terms
and then even more upsetting,
you'll see some of the same terms,
but they mean different things
depending on which database documentation you're using
or which paper you're reading.
So I talked about three levels, eventual consistency,
causal consistency, and linearizability in my talk,
which I think is kind of a good sample.
But this area of computer science
is a lot less paved than isolation is.
Yeah, I agree with that.
And it also seems to me like it really matters
for the particular database server that you're using,
what its flavor of distributed means, right?
Like my understanding from MongoDB is replication
is largely about reliability, failover, uptime,
but the possibility of reading from a replica
for some read scaling.
- Exactly.
- Whereas you might have another one,
kind of with the example that I talked about
with like, we want our data located in multiple geographies
and all of them are kind of the local database
for those areas.
And so the types of issues you run into
as well as the words you use,
they probably vary somewhat, right?
Because you're kind of solving different problems.
Well, we both know the MongoDB one pretty well.
So maybe give us the story on like a replica set,
which is, all of you talk about it.
- Yeah.
- What's the motivation of replica set
and what are the challenges and different modes there?
- Yeah, so 90%, 95% of people use MongoDB
deploy it as a three node replica set.
And 90 to 95% of the time, as you said,
their goal is failover.
That if the primary goes down,
they want a very recent hot copy of their data available
in a secondary, which will be promoted to primary
as quickly as possible.
And if you're writing to and reading from the primary,
Somewhat surprisingly, you can still see anomalies
because there could be a failover
in between the time that you wrote to the primary
and the time that you do that read,
you might be reading from a different member
which didn't get the copy.
And so we've changed the default
within the last few years, I think,
to make every right wait
to be replicated to a majority of the members.
So that-- and then we've got a protocol that ensures that
whoever becomes primary after a failover,
therefore, is guaranteed to have that data.
So you are-- with that setup, you're pretty well
protected from anomalies.
I'm sure that pedants and stress testers
have found exceptions to those.
So I'm not going to make any promises.
But read or write for the primary--
>>Maybe if your write to the primary
is the thing that takes it down, potentially.
Something really, really instantaneous almost.
But yeah.
>>There are always edge cases.
>>Yeah, potentially.
Yeah.
OK.
>>The real inconsistencies that you start to see
is if you do secondary reads.
So if you read from a follower, that
can be useful because you're shifting load from the primary
or maybe the follower is located at a lower latency location
on Earth to you.
But it's always going to have some degree of lag
compared to the primary.
So by default, you're going to get
what we call eventual consistency.
Any write that occurs on the primary
that gets acknowledged by a majority of the members
will eventually be replicated to all of the members.
So all of the members will pass through the same series
of states as the primary does, at least the same set of states
that the primary got majority acknowledgment of,
to be extremely technical.
But if you read from the primary and then a secondary
and then a different secondary, you'll
It's like you're jumping around in time
because you'll always be reading a different version of the data
and some of those versions will be older
than the last version that you saw.
In MongoDB, in order to make that happen,
you've got to pass extra flags opting into this read
from secondary thing, right, in the driver?
Yes, that's right.
We call that read preference and there are a bunch of options,
but the default is just to read from the primary
not see a lot of inconsistencies.
- Okay.
So you mentioned a couple,
this is the eventual consistency issue.
What are some of the other consistencies
that you talked about?
- So there's causal consistency,
which I think is quite nice.
You can get it in MongoDB by using the sessions API.
And causal consistency ensures that every write that you do
and everything affected by that write,
you will be able to read its consequences.
And here again, I think talking about the implementation
really makes things a lot clearer than talking about
like the abstract mathematical definition.
So here's the way MongoDB does it.
You connect a client, you do an update.
The primary applies the update,
sends it to, waits for a majority of members
to acknowledge it.
And then the primary also increments a counter.
So let's say that counter is now, has the value four.
And so it replies to the client and says,
"Your update succeeded and the counter value is now four."
Now you can read from a secondary,
you can say, I want to read some value,
but don't reply until your counter is at least four.
Now in the background,
secondaries are replicating from the primary,
and they're also replicating the primary's counter value.
And so only when they get to the number four or past,
do they reply to your query.
And they're also guaranteed at that point
to have applied to that update
that you just sent to the primary.
- Okay.
Yeah, that's a really cool solution.
One of the problems, if you'll read from secondaries
is imagine you're going to create a new account,
let's say on a website.
Go in there and say, here's my information.
Yes, my password has a lowercase and uppercase
and a special number and whatever, right?
Say create, it inserts it into the primary,
it responds, redirects back to the server and says,
you're on your account page, let me just pull back
from the database who you are to show your details
on the page.
And if, you know, that's basically instant, right?
Down to ping time to the server.
And you could potentially end up in a situation
where you've just created an account,
but then you hit a replica that has yet to receive that.
So what you're saying is, if we use this concept
of sessions, we'll get some kind of point in time marker
that we're gonna wait until just MongoDB behind the scenes
will basically block and say,
we're still waiting on that answer, hold on for who it is
until that replica makes that point in time or further.
- Exactly.
- Okay, yeah, that's excellent.
Question from the audience from Marwan says,
how do you keep the counter store consistent
if you need to replicate it across regions?
So the counter at any given moment in time
will have different values on different replicas.
But that's actually its purpose, is
that it represents how caught up each of the members
is on their shared sequence of operations.
Once you have replicated a given operation,
you've also updated your counter value to the counter value
that the primary had when it did that operation.
And so you're now consistent,
but the primary may be ahead of that as well.
Like there's never any absolute truth.
There's only a sequence of operations
in your position in it.
- I think another important piece of information here
is that you're writing to the leader.
The leader always knows what its point in time number is
and it can increment that.
- That's right.
And so that thing's always gonna be consistent
and auto-incrementing forward.
It's just a matter of how caught up are the replicas, right?
- Exactly.
And if you want the MongoDB terms for these,
that sequence of operations is the op log
and that counter is the op time.
- Okay, yeah.
And that's basically that op log.
That's the thing that gets pushed to the replicas
and is copied as it goes, yeah?
- Exactly.
- Which brings us a little bit back full circle
to your talking about like these time series stream data.
It's kind of like replicating across these clusters.
- Yeah, that's right.
The Oplog is the original streaming data at MongoDB
and people have done all sorts of hacks on top of it.
And we're making that kind of mechanism more and more general
so you can do all sorts of different things
with streams of operations.
>> Cool.
All right, well, do you think we've covered it, Jesse?
>> The final--
>> What did we miss then?
What should we throw in here before we call it done?
>> We can mention the final consistency level, which
is called linearizability.
And it's pretty easy to understand.
If you do an operation and then you
try to read the results of what you just did from any member,
you are guaranteed to see that result.
It's pretty much the strictest level of consistency,
but it's also quite expensive and slow.
So MongoDB does provide this, but it
requires a lot of machination behind the scenes.
So don't use it unless you need to.
But if you do need it for something
like if you're updating users password, where you want
to make sure that every attempt to read that password
will always get the freshest copy,
then linearizability is the consistency level to use.
Excellent.
Well, I think they all sound pretty straightforward,
but the consequences of choosing these different levels
and then what that means for how you write code
around those systems, it's pretty complex.
And it also just this whole conversation
has made me appreciate how much databases serve
as the actual concurrency coordinators
of modern applications.
- That is a great point.
- Yeah, I mean, you can write web apps or APIs or queues
and just kind of almost forget that concurrency is happening
and you just talk to the database
And how can you forget that?
Because it falls upon the database
to keep this stuff hanging together.
- Yep.
- Cool.
- So I think in the show notes or wherever,
we should drop a link to a blog post that I wrote,
which has a link to lots of papers
and other places where you can learn more,
because this is a very hard topic to learn,
especially from a podcast or a conference talk.
you need to read multiple times, maybe make flashcards.
But I kind of hope that this way of talking about things
where we focus on--
yeah, right there.
I think this way of talking about things where we think of,
OK, isolation is a way of hiding the consequences of concurrency
and consistency is a way of hiding
the consequences of replication.
That was a useful breakthrough for me,
and so I hope it's useful for other people too.
- Yeah, I'm sure it will be.
And I'll definitely link this article in the show notes
along with the consistency diagrams
and all the other things.
- Great.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, Jesse, thank you for being here.
It's been really great to have you back on the show.
- Thanks a lot, Michael.
- Yeah, yeah, thanks for coming.
See ya.
[BLANK_AUDIO]